Often the solitary dweller awaits favor for himself, the mercy of the Lord, although he, anxious in spirit, has long been obliged to stir with his hands (i.e., row?) the ice-cold (lit. ost-cold) sea over the path of the waters, to travel the paths of exile.
Fate is utterly inexorable (lit. solute).
So spoke the wanderer, mindful of hardships, of cruel slaughters, of the death of beloved kinsmen: Often alone each dawn I have had to bewail my sorrows; there is not now any one living (lit. one of the living) to whom I dare speak my mind openly.
In truth I know that (it) is a very noble custom in a man that he should bind fast his mind, guard the treasury of his heart, let him think as he will.
(One) weary in spirit cannot resist fate nor (can) the troubled thought afford consolation ( lit. perform help ); therefore (those) eager for glorious reputation often bind fast in their hearts a gloomy (thought).
So I, often wretched, de- prived of my native land, far from my noble kinsmen, have had to bind my mind with fetters, since (the time) years ago (when I) hid in the concealment of the earth (i.e., buried) my gold-friend (i.e., generous lord), and I, abject, winter-griev- ing (i.e., in a mood as dreary as winter? oppressed by ad- vancing years?) went from there over the surface (lit. nd- ing) of the waves, wretched, I sought the dwelling of a dis- penser of treasure (i.e., generous lord), (sought) where I might be able to find far or near some one who, in a mead-hall, might know of my (people) or might be willing to console me, friendless, comfort (me) with pleasures.
He who ex- periences (it) knows how cruel is sorrow as a companion to him who has few friendly protectors for himself.
The path of exile attends him, not twisted gold, a mournful spirit, not earthly prosperity.
He remembers the warriors in the hall (lit. ll-warriors) and the receiving of treasure, (remem- bers) how in his youth his gold-friend (i.e., generous lord) entertained him at feasting.
Joy has all disappeared ! Therefore he who must knows (how to) do without the instructive speeches of his beloved friendly lord for a long time, when sorrow and sleep together often bind the wretched solitary (one).
It seems to him in his mind that he is embracing and kissing his lord and laying his hands and head on his knee, as he sometimes formerly in the days of yore enjoyed the gift-throne (i.e., the throne where his lord sat dispensing gifts).
Then the friendless (lordless?) man awakens again, sees before him the dark waves, (sees) sea- birds bathe (and) spread their feathers, (sees) hoar-frost and snow fall mingled with hail.
Then the wounds of the heart are the more severe, painful (with longing) for a loved one.
Sorrow is renewed when the memory of kinsmen passes through his mind; (he) greets (them) joyfully, eagerly regards (his) comrades in arms (lit. mpanions of warriors).
They float away again.
The spirit of the floating ones (i.e., phantoms) does not bring there many familiar songs.
Care is renewed for him who must very often send forth his weary spirit over the surface (lit. nding) of the waves.
Therefore I cannot imagine why throughout this world my mind will not grow gloomy when I consider all the life of men, how they suddenly left the hall (lit. oor of the hall), the courageous young retainers.
So this world every day (lit. ch of all days) is crumbling and falling; therefore a man cannot become wise before he has his portion of years in the world.
A wise man must (be) patient, nor must he (be) at all too irascible nor too hasty of speech nor too weak a warrior nor too reckless nor too fearful nor too elated nor too avaricious nor ever (lit. ver) too eager for glory before he really knows--a man must wait, when he makes a vow, until, bold-spirited, (he) really knows whither the thought of his heart will turn.
A clever man ought to realize how terrible (it) will be when all the wealth of this world stands waste, as now variously (i.e., here and there) throughout this world walls stand wind-blown, covered with hoar-frost, the dwellings storm-beaten.
The wine-halls are crumbling, the rulers lie dead, deprived of revelry, all the band of warriors has fallen proud by the wall.
War destroyed some, carried (them) away; a bird carried one off over the high sea; the gray wolf shared one with death; a sad-faced man hid (i.e., buried) one in a grave.
Thus the Creator of men laid waste this dwelling- place, until the old works of giants (i.e., buildings) stood vacant, without the noise of the inhabitants.
He then thoughtfully (lit. sely) reflected upon this place of ruins (lit. ll-place) and profoundly meditates upon this sad life, wise in heart, (he) often remembers many slaughters in battle far (back in time) and speaks these words: Where has the horse gone ? Where has the warrior gone ? Where has the giver of treasure gone? Where have (lit. s) the banquet seats gone? Where are the revelries in the hall? Alas, bright cup ! Alas, armored warrior ! Alas, princely splendor (lit. lendor of a prince) ! How that time has passed away, grown dark under cover of night, as (if) it had never been! Now the wall, wondrously high, decorated with serpent de- signs, outlasts the beloved band of warriors.
The force (lit. rces) of ash-wood spears destroyed the warriors, weapons greedy for slaughter, (and) fate, that famed (one), and storms beat upon these stone slopes (walls?), a driving (lit. lling) snowstorm binds the earth, the howling of winter, when (it) comes, (all) dark, the shadow of night grows dark, sends from the north a fierce hailstorm, to the vexation of men.
All the kingdom of the earth is full of hardships, the decree of the fates changes the world under the heavens.
Here wealth is transitory, here friend is transitory, here man is transitory, here kinsman is transitory, this whole foundation of the earth is becoming empty.
So spoke the (man) wise in spirit, sat apart in secret meditation.
Good is he who keeps his pledges, nor ought a man ever (lit. ver) make known the grief from out of his breast too quickly, unless he, the man, should know beforehand how to bring about a remedy with fortitude.
It will be well for him who seeks grace for himself, comfort from the Father in heaven, where for us is (lit. ands) all security.